docs/Devenv-Customization.md, before:

# Customization Guide for the Devenv

If you've forked this repository for your organization, this guide explains what to configure so the environment matches your org. The essentials live in `devenv.config`; repository-creation standards live in `tools/config/repo-types.yaml`.

## Quick Checklist

- ✅ Update `devenv.config` for org identity, container name, workflows, and bootstrap defaults
- ✅ (Optional) Create `org-custom-bootstrap.sh` and `org-custom-startup.sh` for organization-wide customizations
- ✅ (If you use repo creation tooling) Update `tools/config/repo-types.yaml` for naming, templates, branch protection, and post-creation scripts
- ✅ Create/adjust template repos per type (recommended) so new repos start with CI, CODEOWNERS, and hooks

## Organization-Level Custom Scripts

For organization-wide customizations that should apply to all developers, create these scripts in `.devcontainer/`:

### org-custom-bootstrap.sh

Runs during container creation/bootstrap. Use this for:
- Installing organization-specific tools and dependencies
- Configuring company-wide settings
- Setting up organization-specific certificates or credentials
- Initializing shared development services

**Example:**
```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail

# Install organization-specific tools
echo "Installing company tools..."
sudo apt-get install -y custom-company-tool

# Configure organization settings
echo "Configuring company defaults..."
git config --global url."https://github.com/your-org/".insteadOf "https://gh/"
```

### org-custom-startup.sh

Runs each time VS Code starts. Use this for:
- Starting organization-specific services
- Validating required environment setup
- Displaying organization-specific welcome messages
- Connecting to shared development resources

**Example:**
```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail

echo "🏢 Welcome to YourOrg Development Environment"

# Start organization services if needed
if ! docker ps | grep -q company-service; then
    echo "Starting company service..."
    docker-compose -f $DEVENV_ROOT/.devcontainer/company-services.yml up -d
fi
```

**Important:** These scripts should be committed to the repository so all team members benefit from the customizations.

## User-Level Customizations

Individual developers can add their own customizations using:
- `user-custom-bootstrap.sh` - Personal bootstrap customizations (not committed)
- `user-custom-startup.sh` - Personal startup customizations (not committed)

Use the helper scripts to add commands:
```bash
devenv-add-custom-bootstrap "your-command"
devenv-add-custom-startup "your-command"
```

## Required: devenv.config

Edit `devenv.config` in the root directory:

### [organization]

```ini
[organization]
name=YourOrg
github_org=your-org
email_domain=yourorg.com
```

- **name**: Organization name (for docs/branding)
- **github_org**: GitHub org/user used for cloning and feeds
- **email_domain**: Enforced commit email domain (empty = any valid email)

### [container]

```ini
[container]
name=YourOrg Dev Environment
```

- **name**: Display name for the dev container

### [workflows]

```ini
[workflows]
status_workflow=Backlog,Ready,In Progress,In review,Done
issue_types=story,bug
```

- **status_workflow**: Your issue flow, ordered
- **issue_types**: Issue types used by your teams

### [bootstrap]

```ini
[bootstrap]
validate_config=true
```

- **validate_config**: Validate config on startup (recommended: true)

## Repo Creation Standards (repo-create.sh)

If you use `tools/scripts/repo-create.sh`, configure `tools/config/repo-types.yaml`:

### Configuration per type:

- **Naming**: `naming_pattern` and `naming_example` per type (e.g., `service.<category>.<descriptor>`, `gateway.<category>.<descriptor>`, `app.web.<descriptor>`, `lib.cs.<category>.<descriptor>`)
- **Templates**: `template` per type (or null) to pre-bake CI, CODEOWNERS, and .repo scripts
- **Template marking**: `isTemplate` (boolean, default: false) marks the repository as a GitHub template, making it available for use with "Use this template" button
- **Post-creation**: `post_creation_script`, `delete_post_creation_script`, and `post_creation_commit_handling` (`none|amend|new`)
- **Merge types**: `allowedMergeTypes` - Controls which merge buttons appear in the GitHub UI (merge|squash|rebase)
  - This is a repository-level setting that applies globally
  - Should match the ruleset's `allowed_merge_methods` for consistency
  - Both settings work together: this controls UI, ruleset enforces on protected branches
- **PR branch deletion**: `deletePRBranchOnMerge` (boolean, default: true) - Automatically delete PR branches after merge
- **Rulesets** (GitHub Pro/public repos only):
  - `rulesetConfigFile`: Path to JSON ruleset file in `tools/config/` (e.g., `ruleset-default.json`)
  - Set to `null` or blank to disable rulesets for a type
  - JSON file is a GitHub ruleset export with token placeholders: `{{repo_name}}`, `{{owner}}`, `{{type_name}}`, `{{type_description}}`
  - Ruleset can also specify `allowed_merge_methods` for protected branches (more restrictive than repo-level setting)

#### Ruleset JSON tokens

Your ruleset JSON file can use these tokens, which are replaced during application:

- `{{repo_name}}` - Full repository name (e.g., `service.platform.identity`)
- `{{owner}}` - Organization/owner name
- `{{type_name}}` - Repository type (e.g., `service`, `documentation`)
- `{{type_description}}` - Type description from config

### Example configuration:

```yaml
service:
  description: Backend microservices
  template: template.service
  naming_pattern: '^service\.[a-z0-9-]+\.[a-z0-9-]+$'
  naming_example: "service.platform.identity"
  mainBranch: master
  allowedMergeTypes:
    - squash
  rulesetConfigFile: ruleset-default.json
  post_creation_script: ".repo/post-create.sh"
```

### Example ruleset JSON (ruleset-default.json):

```json
{
  "name": "{{repo_name}} Protection Ruleset",
  "target": "branch",
  "source": "{{owner}}/{{repo_name}}",
  "enforcement": "active",
  "conditions": {
    "ref_name": {
      "include": ["~DEFAULT_BRANCH"],
      "exclude": []
    }
  },
  "rules": [
    {
      "type": "pull_request",
      "parameters": {
        "required_approving_review_count": 1,
        "require_code_owner_review": true
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "required_linear_history"
    }
  ]
}
```

**To create a ruleset JSON:**
1. Configure a ruleset manually in GitHub UI
2. Export it via API: `gh api repos/OWNER/REPO/rulesets/ID`
3. Save to `tools/config/your-ruleset.json`
4. Replace hardcoded values with tokens (`{{repo_name}}`, `{{owner}}`, etc.)
5. Reference the filename in `rulesetConfigFile` property

### Tip

Keep a lightweight template repo for each type so new repos start with pipelines, CODEOWNERS, and `.repo/` hooks already in place.

## devenv.config Examples

### Small Startup

```ini
[organization]
name=Acme Corp
github_org=acme-corp
email_domain=acme.com

[container]
name=Acme Dev Environment

[workflows]
status_workflow=Backlog,In Progress,Done
issue_types=story,bug
```

### Enterprise Organization

```ini
[organization]
name=Mega Corp
github_org=mega-corp-dev
email_domain=megacorp.com

[container]
name=Mega Corp Development Environment

[workflows]
status_workflow=Backlog,Ready,In Progress,In review,Testing,Done
issue_types=story,bug
```

## What You Should NOT Change (unless you want to maintain your fork)

- Test infrastructure (unless enhancing it)
- Error handling libraries
- Git configuration helpers
- Version comparison logic
- Core script templates
- Bootstrap framework

These are intended to be generic and reused across orgs.

## Advanced Customization

For deeper bootstrap tweaks, see [Bootstrap-Customization.md](./Bootstrap-Customization.md) (modular tasks, overrides, env-based flows).

## Contributing Improvements Back

1. Fork the main devenv repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your improvements
4. Ensure all tests pass
5. Submit a pull request

See [Contributing](./Contributing.md) for more details.

## Getting Help

- Check the `docs/` folder for feature-specific topics
- Review test files in `tools/tests/` for usage examples

Commit message:

patch: add additional gh obptions to repo config

docs/Devenv-Customization.md, after:

# Customization Guide for the Devenv

If you've forked this repository for your organization, this guide explains what to configure so the environment matches your org. The essentials live in `devenv.config`; repository-creation standards live in `tools/config/repo-types.yaml`.

## Quick Checklist

- ✅ Update `devenv.config` for org identity, container name, workflows, and bootstrap defaults
- ✅ (Optional) Create `org-custom-bootstrap.sh` and `org-custom-startup.sh` for organization-wide customizations
- ✅ (If you use repo creation tooling) Update `tools/config/repo-types.yaml` for naming, templates, branch protection, and post-creation scripts
- ✅ Create/adjust template repos per type (recommended) so new repos start with CI, CODEOWNERS, and hooks

## Organization-Level Custom Scripts

For organization-wide customizations that should apply to all developers, create these scripts in `.devcontainer/`:

### org-custom-bootstrap.sh

Runs during container creation/bootstrap. Use this for:
- Installing organization-specific tools and dependencies
- Configuring company-wide settings
- Setting up organization-specific certificates or credentials
- Initializing shared development services

**Example:**
```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail

# Install organization-specific tools
echo "Installing company tools..."
sudo apt-get install -y custom-company-tool

# Configure organization settings
echo "Configuring company defaults..."
git config --global url."https://github.com/your-org/".insteadOf "https://gh/"
```

### org-custom-startup.sh

Runs each time VS Code starts. Use this for:
- Starting organization-specific services
- Validating required environment setup
- Displaying organization-specific welcome messages
- Connecting to shared development resources

**Example:**
```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail

echo "🏢 Welcome to YourOrg Development Environment"

# Start organization services if needed
if ! docker ps | grep -q company-service; then
    echo "Starting company service..."
    docker-compose -f $DEVENV_ROOT/.devcontainer/company-services.yml up -d
fi
```

**Important:** These scripts should be committed to the repository so all team members benefit from the customizations.

## User-Level Customizations

Individual developers can add their own customizations using:
- `user-custom-bootstrap.sh` - Personal bootstrap customizations (not committed)
- `user-custom-startup.sh` - Personal startup customizations (not committed)

Use the helper scripts to add commands:
```bash
devenv-add-custom-bootstrap "your-command"
devenv-add-custom-startup "your-command"
```

## Required: devenv.config

Edit `devenv.config` in the root directory:

### [organization]

```ini
[organization]
name=YourOrg
github_org=your-org
email_domain=yourorg.com
```

- **name**: Organization name (for docs/branding)
- **github_org**: GitHub org/user used for cloning and feeds
- **email_domain**: Enforced commit email domain (empty = any valid email)

### [container]

```ini
[container]
name=YourOrg Dev Environment
```

- **name**: Display name for the dev container

### [workflows]

```ini
[workflows]
status_workflow=Backlog,Ready,In Progress,In review,Done
issue_types=story,bug
```

- **status_workflow**: Your issue flow, ordered
- **issue_types**: Issue types used by your teams

### [bootstrap]

```ini
[bootstrap]
validate_config=true
```

- **validate_config**: Validate config on startup (recommended: true)

## Repo Creation Standards (repo-create.sh)

If you use `tools/scripts/repo-create.sh`, configure `tools/config/repo-types.yaml`:

### Configuration per type:

- **Naming**: `naming_pattern` and `naming_example` per type (e.g., `service.<category>.<descriptor>`, `gateway.<category>.<descriptor>`, `app.web.<descriptor>`, `lib.cs.<category>.<descriptor>`)
- **Templates**: `template` per type (or null) to pre-bake CI, CODEOWNERS, and .repo scripts
- **Template marking**: `isTemplate` (boolean, default: false) marks the repository as a GitHub template, making it available for use with "Use this template" button
- **Post-creation**: `post_creation_script`, `delete_post_creation_script`, and `post_creation_commit_handling` (`none|amend|new`)
- **Merge types**: `allowedMergeTypes` - Controls which merge buttons appear in the GitHub UI (merge|squash|rebase)
  - This is a repository-level setting that applies globally
  - Should match the ruleset's `allowed_merge_methods` for consistency
  - Both settings work together: this controls UI, ruleset enforces on protected branches
- **PR branch deletion**: `deletePRBranchOnMerge` (boolean, default: true) - Automatically delete PR branches after merge
- **Wiki**: `hasWiki` (boolean, default: false) - Enable/disable the Wiki feature
  - Set to `true` for documentation repositories where you want a wiki
  - Most code repositories should keep this disabled to avoid confusion with repository documentation
- **Issues**: `hasIssues` (boolean, default: true) - Enable/disable the Issues tab
  - Set to `false` for template repositories since they shouldn't track issues
  - Keep enabled for active development repositories
- **Discussions**: `hasDiscussions` (boolean, default: false) - Enable GitHub Discussions
  - Useful for community-driven projects or public repositories
  - Provides a forum-like space separate from issues
- **Projects**: `hasProjects` (boolean, default: false) - Enable the Projects tab visibility
  - Controls whether the "Projects" tab appears in the repository navigation
  - Note: This only affects visibility/convenience - issues can be added to GitHub Projects regardless of this setting
  - Disable if using external project management tools (Jira, Azure DevOps, etc.) or want to reduce tab clutter
  - Enable only if your team actively uses GitHub Projects and wants easy access from the repo interface
- **Auto-merge**: `allowAutoMerge` (boolean, default: true) - Allow auto-merge on pull requests
  - Enables automation workflows to merge PRs after checks pass
  - Useful for Dependabot and other automated updates
- **Update branch**: `allowUpdateBranch` (boolean, default: true) - Show "Update branch" button on PRs
  - Allows contributors to easily update their PR branch with latest changes from base branch
  - Recommended for most repositories to keep PRs current
- **Forking**: `allowForking` (boolean, default: false for code, true for templates) - Allow others to fork the repository
  - Enable for template repositories so others can use them
  - Keep disabled for private/internal code repositories
- **Squash PR title**: `useSquashPRTitleAsDefault` (boolean, default: true) - Use PR title as squash commit message
  - When enabled, squash merges use PR title instead of concatenating all commit messages
  - Recommended to keep commits in main branch clean and meaningful
- **Rulesets** (GitHub Pro/public repos only):
  - `rulesetConfigFile`: Path to JSON ruleset file in `tools/config/` (e.g., `ruleset-default.json`)
  - Set to `null` or blank to disable rulesets for a type
  - JSON file is a GitHub ruleset export with token placeholders: `{{repo_name}}`, `{{owner}}`, `{{type_name}}`, `{{type_description}}`
  - Ruleset can also specify `allowed_merge_methods` for protected branches (more restrictive than repo-level setting)

#### Ruleset JSON tokens

Your ruleset JSON file can use these tokens, which are replaced during application:

- `{{repo_name}}` - Full repository name (e.g., `service.platform.identity`)
- `{{owner}}` - Organization/owner name
- `{{type_name}}` - Repository type (e.g., `service`, `documentation`)
- `{{type_description}}` - Type description from config

### Example configuration:

```yaml
service:
  description: Backend microservices
  template: template.service
  naming_pattern: '^service\.[a-z0-9-]+\.[a-z0-9-]+$'
  naming_example: "service.platform.identity"
  mainBranch: master
  allowedMergeTypes:
    - squash
  rulesetConfigFile: ruleset-default.json
  post_creation_script: ".repo/post-create.sh"
```

### Example ruleset JSON (ruleset-default.json):

```json
{
  "name": "{{repo_name}} Protection Ruleset",
  "target": "branch",
  "source": "{{owner}}/{{repo_name}}",
  "enforcement": "active",
  "conditions": {
    "ref_name": {
      "include": ["~DEFAULT_BRANCH"],
      "exclude": []
    }
  },
  "rules": [
    {
      "type": "pull_request",
      "parameters": {
        "required_approving_review_count": 1,
        "require_code_owner_review": true
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "required_linear_history"
    }
  ]
}
```

**To create a ruleset JSON:**
1. Configure a ruleset manually in GitHub UI
2. Export it via API: `gh api repos/OWNER/REPO/rulesets/ID`
3. Save to `tools/config/your-ruleset.json`
4. Replace hardcoded values with tokens (`{{repo_name}}`, `{{owner}}`, etc.)
5. Reference the filename in `rulesetConfigFile` property

### Tip

Keep a lightweight template repo for each type so new repos start with pipelines, CODEOWNERS, and `.repo/` hooks already in place.

## devenv.config Examples

### Small Startup

```ini
[organization]
name=Acme Corp
github_org=acme-corp
email_domain=acme.com

[container]
name=Acme Dev Environment

[workflows]
status_workflow=Backlog,In Progress,Done
issue_types=story,bug
```

### Enterprise Organization

```ini
[organization]
name=Mega Corp
github_org=mega-corp-dev
email_domain=megacorp.com

[container]
name=Mega Corp Development Environment

[workflows]
status_workflow=Backlog,Ready,In Progress,In review,Testing,Done
issue_types=story,bug
```

## What You Should NOT Change (unless you want to maintain your fork)

- Test infrastructure (unless enhancing it)
- Error handling libraries
- Git configuration helpers
- Version comparison logic
- Core script templates
- Bootstrap framework

These are intended to be generic and reused across orgs.

## Advanced Customization

For deeper bootstrap tweaks, see [Bootstrap-Customization.md](./Bootstrap-Customization.md) (modular tasks, overrides, env-based flows).

## Contributing Improvements Back

1. Fork the main devenv repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your improvements
4. Ensure all tests pass
5. Submit a pull request

See [Contributing](./Contributing.md) for more details.

## Getting Help

- Check the `docs/` folder for feature-specific topics
- Review test files in `tools/tests/` for usage examples
